The utilities or tools contained herein are essential for user management of ancillary
datasm operation, status determination, and related tasks that support various tasks 
that are routine to E3SM data operations.  Their functions are briefly described below:

NOTE:  These tools are "installed" to `"[STAGING_TOOLS]"`, and many rely upon
definition files (Archive_Map, dataset_spec.yam) in `"[STAGING_RESOURCE]"`.

NOTE:  To employ these tools, you must add the following to your .bashrc file:

    `export DSM_GETPATH=[DSM_STAGING]/Relocation/.dsm_get_root_path.sh`

    Many of these scripts call upon other scripts, and rather than have the paths to
    these scripts hard-coded into each script (making then non-relocatable), the above
    "dsm_get_root_path.sh" reads a table `([DSM_STAGING]/Relocation/.dsm_root_paths)`
    to resolve keywords used to specify important datasm root paths.

See the full manual:

    https://github.com/E3SM-Project/datasm/blob/master/docs/Managing_E3SM_Data_Publication_v0.5.md

and in particular, the section: "The DataSM Root Paths System" to determine the value
assigned to `[DSM_STAGING]` for your system.

NOTE:  Much of E3SM data operations involve "datasets", and in that regard, dataset_ids
are ubiquitous and employed as "tokens" for many operations.  Single dataset_ids, or
files containing lists of dataset_ids, are often among the parameters given to a tool to
accomplish a given task.  Hence the utilities "list_e3sm_dsids" and "list_cmip_dsids",
each of which employ the dataset-defining "dataset_spec.yaml" are often filtered down to
an appropriate list of dataset_ids as a first step in condicting operations.

## ALPHABETIC LISTING OF TOOLS ##

- **archive_dataset_extractor.sh**

  Usage

  ```
    archive_dataset_extractor.sh infile [dest_directory]
  ```

  Accepts a file of ONE line from the Archive_Map, and will extract the
  corresponding datasets to the dest_directory (or just list them, if no
  directory is given.)

- **archive_dataset_extractor.py**

  Usage

  ```
      python archive_dataset_extractor.py -a am_specfile [-d dest_dir] [-O]
  ```

  Similar to the bash script `"archive_dataset_extractor.sh"`. Use
  `"--help"` for details.

- **archive_extraction_service.py**

  Usage

  ```
      nohup python archive_extraction_service.py &
  ```

  Runs much as a background daemon to service "extraction request
  tickets" placed in

      /p/user_pub/e3sm/archive/.extraction_requests_pending/

      /p/user_pub/e3sm/archive/.extraction_requests_processed/ (when done)

  These tickets are automatically generated by `"datasm_extract_from_archive.sh"`,
  which is designed to restart the
  archive_extraction_service if it is not running. Corresponding datasets
  are extracted to the warehouse (/p/user_pub/e3sm/warehouse).

- **archive_holodeck_setup.py**

  Usage

  ```
      (python) archive_holodeck_setup.py [-H holodeck] -A full_path_to_a_leaf_archive_directory
  ```

  Creates a "Holodeck" directory in your current directory, with symlinks to a zstash archive.
  In the Holodeck, you can issue "zstash ls" or "zstash extract" commands and not disturb actual archives.

  The -A archive must name a fully-qualified zstash archive directory (to index.db + numbered tarfiles).
  If -H holodeck_name is not given, a directory "Holodeck" will be created in the current directory.
  If such a directory exists, its contents will be deleted.  If -H holodeck_name is supplied, then
  that directory will be applied, but must either not yet exist, or must be empty.

  NOTE:  These zstash (tar files + index.db) archives are generally used by zstash as temporary
  intermediate "cache" locations for HPSS tape system extractions, and ordinarily deleted upon
  completion of extraction.  To avoid accidental deletion when these archives are used as enduring
  "local archive" tar file locations, the "holodeck" setup ensures that zstash cannot delete the
  tar files upon completed extractions.  Using zstash with "hpss=none" and "--keep" is also intended
  to enable such protection - but the holodeck symlinks provide additional insurance.

- **archive_path_mapper.py**

  Usage

  ```
      archive_path_mapper -a al_listfile [-s sdepfile]
  ```

  Accepts a selected list of lines (from `[ARCHIVE_MANAGEMENT]/Archive_Locator`)
  and for each line, creates a cross-product with each datatype matching pattern
  found in the `[ARCHIVE_MANAGEMENT]/Standard_Datatype_Extraction_Patterns`
  (or a supplied subset).

  Each pattern is applied to the indicated zstash archive to produce all
  found lists of pattern-matched files. A body of preliminary
  `"Archive_Map"` lines are generated, each of which must be reviewed and
  manually completed in order to update the Archive_Map.

- **assess_native_data_status.sh**

  Usage

  ```
      assess_native_data_status.sh native_dataset_id year-range local_path
      (year-yange must be supplied as YYYY,YYYY inclusive)
  ```

  This is designed to support hybrid "maybe local"/"maybe NERSC fetched" warehouse
  operations.  Possibilities exist that:

  a.  The DSM warehouse already has the required files
  b.  (else) The given local path may have the files and can be warehouse-symlinked.
  c.  (else) Neither.  We can separately seek local zstash archive extraction.

  If (a) or (b), the output is `"READY:<dataset_id>:<fullpath>"`.
  If neither, the output is `"FAIL:<dataset_id>"`.
    

- **assess_pub_volume_by_experiment_CMIP6.sh**

  Report individual and total volume of local CMIP6 publication directories
  as defined by `[STAGING_DATA]/CMIP6`.

  Individual volumes are by Activity/Institution/SourceID/Experiment.

- **assess_pub_volume_by_experiment_E3SM.sh**

  Report individual and total volume of local E3SM publication directories
  as defined by `[STAGING_DATA]/E3SM`.

  Individual volumes are by ModelVersion/Experiment.

-   **case_id_for_e3sm_dsid.sh**

    Usage

    ```
        case_id_for_e3sm_dsid.sh <e3sm_dataset_id>
    ```

    This routine will locate the first native output file for the given dataset
    and parse the filename to return the first 3 dot-delimited values, generally
    representing the dataset "case_id".  These are usually:
  
    ```
        <modelversion>.<resolution>.<experiment_and_branch>
        (e.g. "v3.LR.historical_0101")
    ```

    and are often employed to locate the corresponding user_metadata file, or
    a zstash archive name.

- **cmip6_parameters.sh**

  Usage

  ```
      cmip6_parameters.sh <cmip_dataset_id>
  ```

  This routine augments `"derivatives_conf.sh"`, returning the lines

  ```
      parent_native_dsid:<parent_native_dataset_id>
      input_data:<fullpath_to_latest_native_datafiles>
      namefile_data:<fullpath_to_native_namefile> (or "NONE")
      restart_data:<fullpath_to_native_restart_file> (or "NONE")
  ```

  followed by the output of lines from `"derivatives_conf.sh <cmip_dataset_id> fullpath"`.

  These lines are employed by `"dsm_generate_CMIP6.py"` to configure parameters
  for processing a given CMIP dataset_id.

- **create_checksum_manifest_for_dsid.sh**

  Usage

  ```
      create_checksum_manifest_for_dsid.sh <dsid>
  ```

  Given a dataset id `<dsid>`, the latest warehouse version directory
  `<dataset_directory>/<version>` is identified, and a publication checksum
  manifest file (aka "mapfile") is produced in

  ```
      <dataset_directory>/.mapfile-<version>.map
  ```

  The publication system expects to find the manifest file in this location,
  the directory parent to the version directory.

- **datasm_pp_sourceroot.sh**

  Given a dataset_id (E3SM or CMIP6), this script will return the root of
  the path to the best (latest-version) of the corresponding dataset, of
  else return "NONE". If found, it will return the resolution of either
  `[STAGING_DATA]` or `[PUBLICATION_DATA]`, whichever has the latest data.

  NOTE:  The resolution to `[PUBLICATION_DATA]` is only possible at those
  locations where the designated ESGF publication datanode disk is able
  to be accessed fromn the DataSM execution path. See

- **datasm_verify_publication.py**

  Usage

  ```
      datasm_verify_publication -i listfile_of_dsids [-u | --update-status]
  ```

  Given a file containing one or more dataset_ids (E3SM or CMIP6), this
  utility will contact the ESGF search server and return the publication
  status of each dataset. If published, and the ESGF publication directory
  is accessible, it will check also that the latest published version
  matches the latest dated version in the `[PUBLICATION_DATA]` directory/
  It will return either

  ```
      <dataset_id>:PUBLICATION:Verified
  ```
  or
  ```
      <dataset_id>:PUBLICATION:Verification_Fail:<reason>
  ```

  If `[-u | --update-status]` is specified, the corresponding status
  file for the given dataset if updated to reflect this status.

- **derivative_conf.sh**

  Usage

  ```
      derivative_conf.sh <cmip_dataset_id> ["fullpath']
  ```

  This routine will consult the file `"[STAGING_RESOURCE]/derivatives.conf"`
  to return a selection of lines, among which can be:

  ```
      hrz_atm_map_path:[<path_to>]/<regrid_file>  
      mapfile:[<path_to>]/<regrid_file>  
      region_file:[<path_to>]/<region_mask> (or "NONE")
      file_pattern:<file_selector_pattern>
      case_finder:<case_selector_pattern>
  ```

  These are employed by `"dsm_generate_CMIP6.py"` to configure parameters
  for processing a given CMIP dataset_id.

- **df_util.py**

  Usage

  ```
      python df_util.py [directory]
  ```

  Returns the Total, Used, and Free disk space and inode counts for the
  disk partition to wich the supplied directory belongs, or else of the
  current directory if none is supplied.

- **ds_paths_info_dsid_list_compact.sh**

  Given a file containing a list of dataset_ids, this script will output
  for each dataset_id the values given by "ds_paths_info.sh", with the
  additional benefit that each version directory and file count is listed
  parenthetically on the same line as the corresponding warehouse or
  publication path.

- **ds_paths_info_dsid_list.sh**

  Given a file containing a list of dataset_ids, this script will output
  for each dataset_id the values given by "ds_paths_info.sh"

- **ds_paths_info.sh**

  Given a dataset_id (E3SM or CMIP6), this script will:

  ```
    a.  Print the full path to the dataset's status file, if it exists.

    b.  Print the last status value in the status file, if it exists.

    c.  Print the full path to warehouse ensemble directory, and below it
        the list of versions and their file counts.

    d.  Print the full path to publication ensemble directory, and below it
        the list of versions and their file counts.
  ```

  This provide a very rapid way to confirm the status of archive
  extraction, of dataset validation, of publication, and of the generation
  of derivative climos, time-series and CMIP6 variable datasets.

  One may select any of the components above by seeking the keywords
  SF_PATH, STATUS, WH_PATH, or PB_PATH.

- **dsm_generate_checksum_manifest.py**

  Usage

  ```
      dsm_generate_checksum_manifest.py [-h] [--outpath OUTPATH] [-p PROCESSES] [--quiet] input dataset_id version_number
  ```

  Given (typically) an input directory of CMIP output files for a specific
  variable, this routing creates the manifiest (aka "mapfile") required by
  esgpublish.

  positional arguments:

  ```
      input: Path to a directory full of netCDF files

      dataset_id: The ESGF dataset id

      version_number: The version number of the dataset, should be an int
      and not include the 'v' prefix
  ```

  options:

  ```
      -h, --help: show this help message and exit

      --outpath OUTPATH: Output path for the mapfile including the file
      name, by default it will be named <dataset_id>.map and be placed in
      the current working directory.

      -p, --processes PROCESSES: Number of parallel jobs, default is 8

      --quiet: Suppress progress-bar output
  ```

- **dsm_generate_CMIP6.py**

  Usage

  ```
      (python) dsm_generate_CMIP6.py [-h] -w WORKSPACE --runmode RUN_MODE -i INPUT_DSIDS [--dryrun] [--ds_spec ALT_DS_SPEC]
  ```

  WORKSPACE must be a subdirectory of your current working directory.
  RUN_MODE must be either "TEST" or "WORK". In TEST mode, only the first
  year of data will be processed, and the E3SM dataset status files are
  not updated. In WORK mode, all years given in the dataset_spec are
  applied, and the E3SM dataset status files are updated, and the cmorized
  results are moved to i`[STAGING_DATA]` (the warehouse).

  INPUT_DSIDS must be a listfile or CMIP dataset_ids for which CMIP
  generation is desired.

  If "--dryrun" is given, the subordinate python run-script is created
  but not executed.

  ALT_DS_SPEC can be supplied to override the DSM default
  [STAGING_RESOURCE]/dataset_spec.yaml dataset definition file.

  Note: The runtime environment must include the following items:

  ```
    1.  (suggestion) Use "conda create env -n <name> -f (gitrepo)datasm/conda-env/prod.yaml"
        to create the runtime environment.

    2.  pip install datasm (ensures that datasm.utils are available along with configs)

    3.  Place the line

            export DSM_GETPATH=<path_to_DSM_STAGING>/Relocation/.dsm_get_root_path.sh

        into your .bashrc file, so that configs, mapfiles, metadata can be located.

    (on Chrysalis, DSM_STAGING = /lcrc/group/e3sm2/DSM/Staging)

    4.  [optional] pip install e3sm_to_cmip (if using a locally modified version)

    5.  The NCO tools "ncclimo" and "ncremap" must exist in the environment.
  ```

  Note: The configuration and operation of dsm_generate_CMIP6.py is
  provided automatically when running "dsm_manage_CMIP6_production.py",
  itself launched when conducting the operations outlined in the section
  "DSM Operations: Managing the Production of CMIP datasets".

- **dsm_manage_CMIP6_production.py**

  This utility, whose parameters nearly match those of
  "dsm_generate_CMIP.py", will additionally attempt to employ zstash (and
  `[ARCHIVE_MANAGEMENT]/Archive_Map`) to extract necessary native data
  from local zstash archives to [STAGING_DATA] (aka the "warehouse"), in
  preparation for use by the CMIP generation process. Moreover, if no such
  local archive is found, but the Archive_Map has been prepared to specify
  its case_name, that name will be sought as a key in
  `[ARCHIVE_MANAGEMENT]/NERSC_Archive_Map`, and an attempt to launch a
  Globus transfer process (via "zstash check") will be conducted. If
  successful, the afore-mentioned zstash extract to warehouse of
  appropriate native data will be conducted, and finally the command-line
  for dsm_generate_CMIP6.py will be issued, passing down all other given
  command-line parameters.

  If "--lockdir ALT_LOCKDIR" is not supplied, a workspace directory
  "LOCK-yyyymmdd" will be created in your current working directory
  (with yyyymmdd being the current UTC date), and all operations for this
  run (aside from some reporting) will be conducted therein. Any attempt
  to re-invoke dsm_manage with the same workspace will exit with a
  warning. To override and re-run dsm_manage, you must either terminate
  the existing run and destroy (or rename) the workspace directory, or use
  "--lockdir" to name another workspace. This prevents multiple
  invocations of dsm_manage from clobbering each other's input and output
  subdirectories.

  NOTE: Developers:  Currently, this "zstash-extract-as-needed" and
  "zstash-globus-transfer-as-needed" capability is performed "inline"
  with the processing (cmorizing) of the dataset_ids.  This means that
  each of the cmorizing, extraction, and transfer operations must wait
  upon each other to complete, before any other processing can continue.
  Far better and simpler to turn these into ticket-controlled service
  processes that can be set via "look-ahead" to run asychrounously, and
  results polled as needed.  The ticket-management code would be common
  to both the extract and transfer operations, and each process (and
  this parent, dsm_manage_CMIP6_production.py) become easier to maintain.
  Importantly, this asychronicity could cut the overall CMIP generation
  time by over 50% when processing large numbers of datasets.


- **dsspec_contract.py**

  Usage

  ```
      dsspec_contract -i expanded_dataset_spec -o contracted_dataset_spec
  ```

  Accepts a standard form of the dataset_spec (aka "expanded") and will
  take each dataset specification "tree", isolate the
  "case_extensions" branch (where the resolution-specific dataset reams
  and frequencies are specified), and collect these to create a
  consolidated unique "CASE_EXTENSIONS" tree, reducing each dataset_tree
  to its global parameters plus a "Case_Extension_ID" in place of the
  original extensions. This makes it much easier to edit the branches
  (reduced form about 60 to 12) and easier to compare and contrast the
  major dataset definitions, and news ones, etc.

  See "dsspec_expand.py" for the opposite transform.

- **dsspec_expand.py**

  Usage

  ```
      dsspec_expand -i contracted_dataset_spec -o expanded_dataset_spec
  ```

  This utility will turn a contracted form of the E3SM dataset_spec.yaml
  file back its original expanded form, by replacing each
  "Case_Extension_ID" with the actual case extension branch found in the
  CASE_EXTENSIONS tree of the contracted specification. See
  "dsspec_contract.py" for details.

- **ensure_status_file_for_dsid.sh**

  For any given dataset "dsid", this script will return the full path to
  the status file for the corresponding dataset

    `(/p/user_pub/e3sm/staging/status/<dsid>.status)`.

  If no status file exists, one is created. The status file is used by the
  DataSM both to record the history of processing conducted with respect to
  the dataset, and to provide the "latest state", necessary for the Data State
  Machine to advance required processing.

- **get_e3sm_vars_for_cmip.sh**

  Given a CMIP6 variable as input, this script will output the
  corresponding E3SM variable (or CSV list of variables) required in the
  calculation of the CMIP6 variable. The output is obtained by running and
  parsing "e3sm_to_cmip --info". Only works for non-MPAS vars.

- **latest_data_location_by_dsid.sh**

  For a given input dataset_id, will scour both the warehouse and
  publication filesystems for the latest populated version directory. The
  full path to the best location is returned, or else "NONE" if not
  populated directory is found.

- **list_cmip6_dsids.py**
- **list_e3sm_dsids.py**

  These take no parameters. They will output ALL CMIP6 or E3SM
  dataset_ids, employing the currently installed dataset_spec.yaml as
  source. The results may then be filtered with "grep" or "cut" for
  many applications.

- **locate_user_metadata_for_dsid.sh**

  Given a CMIP dataset_id, this routine will find and return the full path
  to the appropriate user_metadata file, whose content will be embedded into
  the files of the generated CMIP dataset.

  NOTE that the utility `metadata_version.py` is called by the CMIP generator
  upon a copy made of the user metadata file to fore a "version" value that
  will avoid the "cmorizing over midnight" problem.

- **metadata_version.py**

  Usage

  ```
      Usage: metadata_version.py -i <full_path_to_metadata.json file> --mode [get|set]
  ```

  If mode is "get", the value of the variable "version" (or "NONE") is returned.
  If mode is "set", then "version" is set to vYYYYMMDD (current UTC date) in the
  given metadata file..

  NOTE that the utility `metadata_version.py` is called by the CMIP generator
  upon a copy made of the user metadata file to force a "version" value that
  will avoid the "cmorizing over midnight" problem.  By default, the CMOR module
  checks the current date when writing out a cmorized datafile and places the
  file into a directory with that date as the version.  Unfortunately, when
  cmorizing many datasets - some of which involve many output files generated
  over several hours - files generated across midnight will be placed into
  disparate directories, and utilities designed to collect the output will
  assign some files to one version, and others to another version of the same
  dataset, despite having been produced from the same native data with the
  same version of the CMOR module.  The only way to override this behavior is
  have the input user_metadata file already contain a value for "version".

- **parent_native_dsid.sh**

  Given a CMIP6 dataset_id, the native (E3SM) dataset_id corresponding to
  the source data is returned.

- **produce_dsid_run_record.sh**

  Subordinate to "dsm_generate_CMIP6.py", this routine is called when any
  CMIP dataset run has completed, to collect all logs and other forensic
  evidence from the current "LOCK" directory to a local directory
  "RUN_REPORTS/\<dsid\>/" for future debugging or performance measures.

- **rw_yaml.py**

  Usage

  ```
      rw_yaml -i yaml_in -o yaml_out [-s] [-t tabsize]
  ```

  This utility will read an arbitrary yaml-format file as a python "dictionary"
  of arbitrary depth for processing, and then write the dictionary out to yaml
  file format. Optionally, dictionary entries are sorted, and the tab-size may
  be changed. Blank lines and comments are lost.

- **set_datafile_metadata_textvalue.sh**

  Usage

  ```
      set_datafile_metadata_textvalue.sh <datafile> <att_name> <att_text>
  ```

  Employs NCO "ncatted" (nc attribute editor) to set a metadata attribute
  without updating the metadata "history" attribute.

- **tar_integrity.sh**

  Usage

  ```
      tar_integrity.sh <directory_of_tar_files>
  ```

  Outputs a line `"ERROR: <tarfile_name> <reason>"` for any tar file where
  the system `file` command does not return text containing the string
  "POSIC tar archive".

- **tell_years_dsid.py**

  For the given dataset_id, consults the dataset_spec.yaml file to return
  the official `"start_year,end_year"` for dataset publication.

- **trisect.py**

  Usage

  ```
      trisect <listfile1> <listfile2>
  ```

  Given two files, "F1" and "F2", each assumed to be lists of items
  (files, dataset_ids, variables, etc), this routine will output 3 files:

    - only-F1: items found only in list F1

    - only-F2: items found only in list F2

    - both-F1_and_f2: items common to both lists

- **ts_utc.py**

  Usage

  ```
      ts=$(python ts_utc.py)
  ```

  Returns UTC timestamp string in YYYYMMDD.hhmmss.msecs format.
  Equivalent to bash `ts=$(date -u +%Y%m%d_%H%M%S_%6N)`

- **update_json_value.py**

  Usage

  ```
      python update_json_value.py -i <json_file> -m get -k <key_name>
      python update_json_value.py -i <json_file> -m set -k <key_name> -v <key_value>
  ```

  Get or set a simple (top-level) string value to a json key.

- **update_latest_files_for_metadata_references_by_dsid_list.sh**

  Usage

  ```
      update_latest_files_for_metadata_references_by_dsid_list.sh <file_of_CMIP_dsids> <file_of_ref_text_line>
  ```

  For each CMIP dataset_id listed in the file, locate the latest version of that dataset
  in the warehouse `([STAGING_DATA])` and update each datafile's metadata references to
  the line of text found in the second supplied file. 


